kucelanāmā bhavata: satīrthyatāṃ gata: sa sāndīpanimandire dvija: |
tvadekarāgeṇa dhanādinisspṛho dināni ninye praśamī gṛhāśramī ||1||
kucela-nāmā	Kuchela named
bhavata: satīrthyatāṃ	with Thee (who was) a fellow disciple
gata: sa	went to, he
sāndipani-mandire	at sage Saandipani's hermitage
dvija:	that Braahmana
tvat-eka-rāgeṇa	with Thee steadily devoted
dhana-ādi-nisspṛha:	in wealth etc., desireless
dināni ninye	days spent
praśamī gṛhāśramī	(as a) calm minded householder
The Brahmin by the name Kuchela (Sudaamaa) was Thy fellow disciple in the hermitage of sage Saandipini. He was totally devoted to Thee. A house holder with a controlled mind and senses, he spent his days calmly without any worldly desires of wealth etc.
samānaśīlā'pi tadīyavallabhā tathaiva no cittajayaṃ sameyuṣī |
kadācidūce bata vṛttilabdhaye ramāpati: kiṃ na sakhā niṣevyate ||2||
samāna-śīlā-api	(being) of same nature even
tadīya-vallabhā	his wife
tathā-eva no	in the same manner did not
citta-jayaṃ sameyuṣī	mind control achieve
kadācit-ūce bata	once said O!
vṛtti-labdhaye	a livelihood to get
ramāpati:	the Consort of Laxmi
kiṃ na sakhā	why do not your friend
niṣevyate	approach
His wife who equalled him in nature , had not achieved the same level of desirelessness as him. Once she asked him why should he not approach his friend Krishna, the Consort of Laxmi, for getting some means of livelihood.
itīrito'yaṃ priyayā kṣudhārtayā jugupsamāno'pi dhane madāvahe |
tadā tvadālokanakautukādyayau vahan paṭānte pṛthukānupāyanam ||3||
iti-īritam-ayaṃ	thus told he
priyayā kṣudhārtayā	by (his wife) troubled by hunger
jugupsamāna:-api	with revulsion even
dhane mada-āvahe	in wealth due to its arrogance bearing
tadā tvat-ālokana-	then, Thee to meet
kautukāt-yayau	eagerness (he) went
vahan paṭa-ante	carrying in one corner of his cloth
pṛthukān-upāyanam	beaten rice as offering
Kuchela set off for Thy place more out of eagerness to meet Thee than for acquiring a means of livelihood, as prodded by his wife, troubled by hunger. He had a repulsiveness towards wealth because of its proneness to generate pride and arrogance. He carried in a corner of his cloth some beaten rice as an offering to Thee.
gato'yamāścaryamayīṃ bhavatpurīṃ gṛheṣu śaibyābhavanaṃ sameyivān |
praviśya vaikuṇṭhamivāpa nirvṛtiṃ tavātisambhāvanayā tu kiṃ puna: ||4||
gata:-ayam-	reaching he
āścryamayīm	wondrous
bhavat-purīm	Thy city
gṛheṣu śaibyā-bhavana	among the houses, Mitravrinda's house
sameyivān	entered
praviśya	entering
vaikuṇṭham-iva-	Vaikuntha only
āpa nivṛtiṃ	attained supreme peace
tava-ati-sambhāvanayā	by Thy lavish hospitality
tu kim puna:	indeed what else more
Kuchela reached Thy wonderful city and among the many houses, entered the house of Mitravrindaa. As he did so he attained supreme peace as though he had entered Vaikuntha only, more so by Thy lavishing hospitality beyond description.
prapūjitaṃ taṃ priyayā ca vījitaṃ kare gṛhītvā'kathaya: purākṛtam |
yadindhanārthaṃ gurudāracoditairapartuvarṣa tadamarṣi kānane ||5||
prapūjitaṃ taṃ	well honoured (by Thee) he
priyayā ca vījitaṃ	and by Thy consort fanned
kare gṛhītvā-	by hand taking
akathaya:	(Thou) narrated
purākṛtam	the incidents
yat-indhana-artham	like (when) for fire wood
guru-dāra-coditai:-	on the teacher's wife's behest
apartu-varṣam	in an unseasonal rain
tat-amarṣi kānane	which was borne in the forest
After a cordial reception by Thee as he was fanned by Thy consort, Thou held his hands and recalled the old incidents. Like when at the behest of the teacher's wife, Thou went together to gather fire wood and were caught in an unseasonal rain in the forest.
trapājuṣo'smāt pṛthukaṃ balādatha pragṛhya muṣṭau sakṛdāśite tvayā |
kṛtaṃ kṛtaṃ nanviyateti saṃbhramādramā kilopetya karaṃ rurodha te ||6||
trapājuṣa:-asmāt	who was feeling shy, from him
pṛthukam balāt-atha	the flattened rice forcefully, then
pragṛhya	snatching
muṣṭau sakṛt-	a fistful once
āśite tvayā	being eaten by Thee
kṛtaṃ kṛtaṃ	enough enough
nanu-iyata-iti	indeed this much thus
saṃbhramāt-ramā	in consternation, Ramaa
kila-upetya	indeed approached
karaṃ rurodha te	and hand held back Thy
Kuchela was feeling very shy and so Thou forcefully snatched the flattened rice from him and ate a fistful. Just then in great consternation Ramaa approached Thee and held back Thy hand saying that that much was indeed enough.
bhakteṣu bhaktena sa mānitastvayā purīṃ vasannekaniśāṃ mahāsukham |
batāparedyurdraviṇaṃ vinā yayau vicitrarūpastava khalvanugraha: ||7||
bhakteṣu bhaktena	in the devotees, devoted (by Thee)
sa mānita:-	he was honoured
tvayā purīṃ vasan-	by Thee, in the city staying
eka niśām	for one night
mahā-sukham	very happily
bata-aparedyu:-	alas! Next day
draviṇaṃ vinā yayau	wealth without went away
vicitra-rūpa:-tava	of strange forms are Thy
khalu-anugraha:	indeed blessings
He was greatly honoured by Thee the devoted of the devotees, and very happily stayed in Thy city for one night. The next day he went away alas without any wealth. Strange indeed are Thy forms of blessings.
yadi hyayāciṣyamadāsyadacyuto vadāmi bhāryāṃ kimiti vrajannasau |
tvaduktilīlāsmitamagnadhī: puna: kramādapaśyanmaṇidīpramālayam ||8||
yadi hi-ayāciṣyam-	if indeed I had asked
adāsyat-acyuta:	would have given Krishna
vadāmi bhāryāṃ kim-iti	will tell my wife what, thus
vrajan-asau	walking he
tvat-ukti-līlā-smita-	Thy talks and playful smile
magna-dhī: puna:	with mind immersed in then
kramāt-apaśyat-	gradually saw
maṇi-dīpram-ālayam	with gems resplendent house
Had I but asked for wealth Krishna would surely have given. What shall I tell my wife?' Thus telling himself he walked along immersed in the memories of Thy talks and Thy playful smile. By and by he reached a gem studded splendorous mansion.
kiṃ mārgavibhraṃśa iti bhraṃman kṣaṇaṃ gṛhaṃ praviṣṭa: sa dadarśa vallabhām |
sakhīparītāṃ maṇihemabhūṣitāṃ bubodha ca tvatkaruṇāṃ mahādbhutām ||9||
kiṃ mārga-vibhraṃśa	what is the way lost
iti bhraṃman kṣaṇaṃ	thus wondering for a moment
gṛhaṃ praviṣṭa:	the house entering
sa dadarśa vallabhām	he saw his wife
sakhī-parītāṃ	by ladies in waiting surrounded
maṇi-hema-bhūṣitāṃ	with gems and gold ornaments adorned
bubodha ca	realised also
tvat-karuṇāṃ	Thy compassion
mahā-adbhutām	most wonderful
What have I lost my way?' Thus wondering for a moment he entered the house. He saw his wife adorned in ornaments of gems and gold and surrounded by ladies in waiting. He then realised Thy grace and compassion and the most wonderful results of the same.
sa ratnaśālāsu vasannapi svayaṃ samunnamadbhaktibharo'mṛtaṃ yayau |
tvamevamāpūritabhaktavāñchito marutpurādhīśa harasva me gadān ||10||
sa ratna-śālāsu	he in the gem studded building
vasan-api svayaṃ	residing though, himself
samunnamad-bhakti-bhara:-	incessantly growing devotion, full of it
amṛtaṃ yayau	liberation attained
tvam-evam-āpūrita-	Thou in this manner fulfilled
bhakta-vāñchita:	the devotees' desires
marutpurādhīśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
harasva me gadān	rid me of my ailments
Residing in the begemmed mansion he himself was full of devotion for Thee which incessantly grew of its own. In the end he attained liberation. Thou in such a manner fulfilled the desire of Thy devotee. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Be pleased to rid me of my ailments.